---
layout: page
title: OCR and Maching Translation
description: This lesson uses commands in Terminal to convert pdfs to tiff files and ultimately to txt files.  Once in this format, files are keyword searchable and can be translated using Yandex. 
---

The Programming Historian lesson I chose is entitled OCR and Machine Translation.  OCR, or Optical Character Recognition, is useful because of the inherent weaknesses of images and image files.  As I learned, organizing image files is difficult to accomplish when using graphical user interface.  In this lesson, I was presented with two .pdf files of documents written in Russian and was tasked first with converting them to .tiff and ultimately to .txt files.  Once in this format, these documents were both “keyword searchable” and able to be translated.   

Because this project required that the programming work be executed in the Terminal, I am not able to include the code accompanying this lesson.  This being the case, most of the work (and the most difficult) parts of this exercise involved downloads such as ImageMagick (for converting files from .pdf to tiff), Tesseract (for converting .tiff files to plain text files), and Yandex (a translation tool).  Once a plain text file is translated into English it is possible to perform this operation on many files in a folder by using a for loop.  Unfortunately, I was not able to set up this for loop because I received a “command not found” error message when entering the translation command in the Terminal.  I am not sure why this is, but would like to fix this program so that it will run.  

My research experience during my senior year of college was often complicated when I needed to read theses and dissertations which existed electronically as images and were therefore not keyword searchable.  I would often waste time reading through pages of material only to discover that the term for which I was looking did not exist.  Because this remains a problem with older scans, I would certainly be interested in applying the technique of converting research files into more user-friendly forms for future research.